---
editor: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

> Everything is a message

The internet is full of "Data Visualization -- 10 best hacks" that keep
reiterating same old materials just paraphrasin it. If you are intersted
in those go a head and google. This is chapter has a different goal --
we will be looking at philosphy of what makes good data visulization and
how you can think about your graphs.

> tables, value boxes, and even your text can all fall under data
> visualization

Let's answer the core question: what is the goal of data
visualization[^visualization_theory-1]. It is to aid communication with
the consumer of your content. Notice it is not completely about
communicating information though it is usually the main goal, and not
about looking pretty, attracting attention, stimulating conversation,
etc. It is about aiding your communication goal. Sounds a little vague
doesn't it? Yes, because your visualization can take any role you want:
showing the data, commenting on data, stimulating conversation,
supporting a point, attracting attention, catching interest or may be
decorating your room. Notice that data visualization is not always about
the data else propaganda would not work.

[^visualization_theory-1]: the "what" question is pretty self
    explanatory

It is extremely important to understand what is your communication goal
and move from there. For our discussion we will focus on communicating
information to our specific audience. Naturally, know your audience!

Let's consider how we can describe a particular choice:

Levers of Chart Making Cotgreave suggested this under-formulation
framework in the November 2022 edition of his newsletter The Sweet Spot.
He put forward five scales of levers that "chart producers can use to
enlighten, not bamboozle." They are as follows:

" Once we've accounted for sound data collection, truth analysis, and
accessible design, it all comes down to fit. You could have the most
beautiful, information-rich, exploratory visualization, but if your
target audience is a C-Suite commuter with 10 seconds and minimal
context, you're out of luck. Conversely, an aggregated dataset made into
a succinct bar chart is wasted on a roomful of domain experts eager to
dive into the details and gather their own insights. Visualizations are
like a puzzle piece that connects your data and your audience: to be
successful, your creation must respect the contours that already exist
on either side. "

Chart levers " 1. Speed to primary insight -- How fast or slow insight
is intended to be extracted from a graph According to him, "it is ok to
make charts that take time to understand". 2. Granularity -- How sparse
or granular is the data that a chart intends to show? 3. Explore or
explain -- whether a visualization is intended to give the users the
opportunity to explore the data themselves (like self-service
dashboards) or to be accompanied by an explaining presentation 4. Dry or
emotional -- refers to how serious the way of presenting the data is
versus how informal and relevant it is to non-data people. According to
Cotgreave, an example of the serious approach is a normal column chart
and for the emotional, a necklace of which the bead's size represents
the same underlying data. 5. Ambiguity vs. accuracy -- For Cotgreave,
there can be intended ambiguity in chart-making instead of clear
accuracy. "

Cognitive load

Design Concepts 1. Choose 2. Useful, consistency, visually appealing, representative, 
simplicity, accessible, and functionality

> Seeing Is Forgetting the Name of the Thing One Sees
> @weschlerSeeingForgettingName1982

> Data visualization pioneer Ben Shneiderman says
> “The purpose of visualisation is not pictures, but insight.”

1.  Data Ink
2.  Information Ratio
3.  What make a good visualization
4.  Representative
5.  Story telling
6.  Design Fundamentals
7.  TABLES Are underrated
8.  information density
9.  Summarize data for plots
10. Simple is better
11. Cognitive load

-   The data viz is misleading
-   the data viz is a new topic
-   the data viz was made for "stupid" people
-   YOU MUST EXPLAIN WHAT YOU SHOW

Look at great viz, look at mid viz, look at bas viz -- reflect and
improve

Attention vs Minimalism

1. What is your goal?
2. What do you want to say?
3. What data can say that?
4. How would you imagine a persuasive visualization look?
5. What is the minimal set?
6. What can you add to reinforce your idea?


1. Define the audience
1. Define the purpose of your visual
1. Choose the form for intended function
1. Implement the visual using design principles 

1. How do brains porcess visuals
> PATTERNS EVERYWHERE even where there are non

  - Preattentive visual cues
  - Gestalt Principles
  
2. Picking the right visual
  - What is the right visual?
  - How to pick the right visual?
  - What to emphasize?
  - What information does it hold?

> Curve lines are easier to follow
  
3. Design Principles -- make it professional

> Start Really simple -- and slowly as you learn how control the message and manage the elements

Build Hierarchy
  - Emphasis -- is when one element stands out 
    - contrast
    - movement
    - white space
  - Repetition (pattern)
  - Proportion
  - Balance 
  - Alignment (! this is how you make your stuff look professional)
  
> Grid is a useful tool
> Alignment + logical spacing = organization
> Think first, implement later.
> Thinking is the hard part -- implementation is easy
> Constraints are your friends
> Working with other people
> Ordinary design is the King
4. Typography 
> Type is at the heart of design

5. Example




What form is appropriate
    What ever everone is familiar with
    How to pick the right one (article on levers)

What tools do we have to build?
Design Tools:
    Organization and Hierarchy:
        Emphasis
            Preattentive visual cues
            Contrast
            Movement
            Proportion
            White Space
        Steven's law and relative magnitured estimation
        Repetition
        Balance
        Gestalt Principles
        Alignment
        Proximity
        Type
        Color(?)


The process of making the plot:
    Intentionality
    Cognitive Load
    Simplicity
        Minimalist
        Data Ink
        Decorations
    User Experience
    Accessibility

todo: add bullet char
